---
layout: post
title: 599 (1-25)
date: 2024-1-26
---
- toc
{:toc}

## Sterling's Chapter 2 (update)
As discussed last week-- and mentioned in the first paragraph of Chapter 2--,
Sterling's chapter on topoi is "greatly influenced by [the notes] of Anel and Joyal".
This reference chapter is hard-going, so I thought I'd try to concurrently
march forward and read [Topos-Logie](http://mathieu.anel.free.fr/mat/doc/Anel-Joyal-Topo-logie.pdf),
which at first glance seems a little more approachable for me.

- At this point, it seems I need to understand some of the sheaf theoretic ideas 
    - Certainly I don't intend to *actually* learn sheaf theory right now, but I need a mental picture of what Kripke-Joyal semantics actually is, and what the notion of "sheaf logic" refers to
<!--
    - Some concepts which seem related to learn the "101" of:
        - [Sheafs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sheaf_(mathematics))
            - The definition seems… natural enough but I don't understand the motivation on that page
            - I'm hoping Kripke-Joyal semantics as motivation itself will be enough for me, so I'll punt on other examples
        - The canonical example of the [cylinder v. Möbius strip fiber bundles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiber_bundle#M%C3%B6bius_strip)
        - [Boolean valued models](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean-valued_model)
            - There're many books that go much further into this, but let's table that
-->

## Misc
- The logic seminar this semester will be a learning seminar on first-order categorical logic, with a rough goal of describing completeness due to Makkai(?)
    - Ronnie thought there wouldn't be enough time in a semester for a treatment of higher order/sorted categorical logic (ie topoi). "Too much machinery"
    - But it should help me understand some of these ideas

## Bundles
I found myself going on a Wikipedia search
Sheaf > Grothendieck Topology > Sieve > Fiber-product > Fiber bundle,
trying to learn some of the spatial(/geometric?) intuition for topoi,
as seems to be the point of Anel and Joyal,
and Sterling's Chapter 2.

I went over some basic material on **fiber bundles**,
from Husemoller's book, referenced by Wikipedia.
### Chapter 2 - (simple) Bundles
A **bundle** is defined as *just* the triple
$$(E, p : E → B, B)$$, which could be compressed to just $$p : E → B$$.

$$E$$ is called the **total space**, $$p$$ the **projection**, and $$B$$ the **base space**.
The namesake comes from thinking of the bundle
"as a union of **fibers** $$p^{-1}(b)$$ for $$b ∈ B$$,
parameterized by $$B$$ and 'glued together' by the topology of the space $$E$$."

A simple example that is often referenced
is the **product bundle**, which is a trivial bundle where
the fibers are constant.
That is, the bundle $$π_1 : B × F → B$$.

The notion of a **subbundle** is defined in the obvious way,
but is a special case of a bundle morphism where the morphisms are inclusions
(described below).

- This is essentially the same as the standard practice of identifying
the domain of an embedding with its image, and thought of as an inclusion.

A **cross section** of a bundle is defined,
but it is *just* a section of the bundle, in the categorical sense.

A **bundle morphism** is *just* a morphism in the arrow category.
That is, the category of bundles $$\mathsf{Bun}$$ is some subcategory of the arrow category.
(As is, it should just *be* the arrow category.)

A **$$B$$-morphism** is a morphism of bundles with equal codomain.
That is, the category of bundles over $$B$$, $$\mathsf{Bun}_B$$ is *just* the slice category over $$B$$.

The book remarks that a (cross) section of a bundle $$p : E → B$$ can be identified with
a $$B$$-morphism $$s : 1_B → p$$.
(I had written that this seemed like a slight error, but I realize the key point is $$B$$-morphism, not just (bundle) morphism.)

A space $$F$$ is called the **fiber of a bundle** if it is isomorphic
to each fibre.
In other words, the bundle is isomorphic to the product bundle.

What about the product of bundles?
Suppose we have bundles $$p : E → B$$ and $$p' : E' → B'$$.
The product is simply $$p × p'$$.
(ie $$\mathsf{Bun}$$ has products if the category of spaces does.)

But what about in $$\mathsf{Bun}_B$$?
Well, it's the pullback, also called the **fiber product**.

- I find it weird that the product in $$\mathsf{Bun}$$
is *just* the product, but the product in $$\mathsf{Bun}_B$$
is the pullback
- Maybe this is one way of understanding what a pullback is:
The pullback is the total space of the product ($$B$$-)bundle.
    - An alternative characterization of it,
    is as the union of the products of the fibers.
    - That is, for each $$b ∈ B$$,
    take the fibers $$p^{-1}(b) ⊆ E$$ and $$p'^{-1}(b) ⊆ E'$$,
    and take their product as subspaces, to get a subspace of $$E × E'$$.
    And aggregate in $$E × E'$$ the rest of the fibers.
    - We then get a ($$B$$-)bundle where each fiber is well, the product of fibers
    - The universality of the pullback is that there's nothing extra in this total space
    - (ie the data of both bundles is minimally captured as such)
- From this upwards view, it's actually the product in $$\mathsf{Bun}$$
that's a little weird
- The product in $$\mathsf{Bun}_B$$ can be viewed as the product in $$\mathsf{Bun}$$
where we additionally require that everything commutes with $$1_B$$ between the base spaces.
- So the product in $$\mathsf{Bun}$$ can be seen as a case where "no such space saving technique" can be employed

A restriction of a bundle is a special case (as before, in the same way)
of an **induced bundle**,
whereby a bundle $$p : E → B$$ and $$f : B' → B$$,
the bundle $$f^*(p) : B' ×_{B', E} E → B$$ is induced by the pullback.

This other sense of pullback,
in which we actually pull back the fibers along the graph $$f$$,
is more fitting of the name in some sense.
Although of course, this is literally just a tilted version of the other pullback we just described (viewed from a different angle).

- So the moral is that pullbacks are both a notion of (fibered) product,
and renaming, simultaneously?
- A much better description of the above is from
[the wikipedia page for pullbacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pullback_(category_theory)#Fiber_bundles)
which says that the fibered product is just the product $$p × p' : E × E' → B × B$$, pulled back across the diagonal $$Δ : B → B × B$$

Moreover, each $$f : B' → B$$
induces a functor $$f^* : \mathsf{Bun}_B → \mathsf{Bun_{B'}}$$.

### Chapter 4 - Fiber Bundles

- I don't understand why we're talking about topological groups,
but they seem ubiquitous, so we'll roll with it
    - [This SO post](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/755722) links to [slides by Iian Smythe](https://pi.math.cornell.edu/~ismythe/Olivetti_Nov_2011_slides.pdf)--
    who was recently here, but unfortunately I never talked to--
    about topological groups

I'm having trouble with the definition of fiber bundle, so let's go over some simple [examples](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiber_bundle#Examples):
- The trivial bundle $$π_1 : B × F → B$$ is a fiber bundle of $$F$$ over $$B$$.
The total space is said to be "globally [a product", not "just locally",
but I don't know what that means at the moment
- The Möbius strip is the total space $$E$$ of the following bundle:
    - $$B = S^1$$ and $$F = \mathbb{R}(?)$$.
    - "The corresponding trivial bundle $$B × F$$ would be a cylinder"
    - I guess we take it for granted that we have already constructed $$E$$, so this isn't a construction
    - I still don't get why the Möbius bundle has no non-vanishing (global) section, so I still have to push on this textbook

A **right $$G$$-space** $$(X, G)$$ is a space $$X$$ with an action $$X × G → X$$
for topological group $$G$$.

An example of a topological group
is $$(\mathbb{R}, +)$$.
I suppose trivially every topological group is also a $$G$$-space relative to itself.
That is, $$\mathbb{R}$$, forgetting the group structure, is compatible with
the group action $$(\mathbb{R}, +)$$.

A **$$G$$-morphism** is a map between $$G$$-spaces
that is compatible with the group action.

Two elements $$x, x' ∈ (X, G)$$ are $$G$$-equivalent if $$∃s∈G. xs=x'$$.
That is, if if they are in the same orbit, as standard.
Then let $$X \mod G$$ denote $$\{xG | x ∈ X\}$$, the class of orbits,
with the quotient topology.

Given a $$G$$-space $$X$$
Let $$α(X)$$ be the bundle 

A bundle $$p : X → B$$ is a $$G$$-bundle
if $$p$$ and $$α(X)$$

...

Given a bundle $$p : $$
